Improve R package creation (#21861)
LLNL/spack: lib/spack/docs/build_systems/rpackage.rst

no longer be able to fetch that version as soon as a new release comes
out. To get around this, add the archive directory as a ``list_url``.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Bioconductor packages
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Bioconductor packages are setup in a similar way to CRAN packages, but there

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bioconductor packages are set up in a similar way to CRAN packages, but there
```

are some very important distinctions. Bioconductor packages can be found at:
https://bioconductor.org/. Bioconductor packages are R packages and so follow
the same packaging scheme as CRAN packages. What is different is that
Bioconductor itself is versioned and released. This scheme, using the
Bioconductor package installer, allows further specification of the minimum
version of R as well as further restrictions on the dependencies between
packages than what is possible with the native R packaging system. Spack can
not replicate these extra features and thus Bioconductor packages in Spack need
to be managed as a group during updates in order to maintain package

> consistency with Bioconductor itself.

Reviewer: We could simply create a bioconductor `BundlePackage` that uses the versioning scheme and package versions that Bioconductor uses. See the `xsdk` package for an example.

Author: I have thought of this, and think I suggested it in the past. I am on the fence about it though. First off, a bundle package would not address the fact that bioconductor packages would need to be updated as a group. It would not help with package creation, PR review, or updates. In fact, it would add one more level as new and updated packages would need to be added to the bundle. All of the bioconductor packages would need to be added with version specs to avoid the possibility of some packages picking up a newer version of a dependency if an older bioconductor bundle is installed. The package file would be quite large and ever growing. Finally, I am not sure that people really want to install all of the spack bioconductor packages, although that may be viewed as reasonable if the bundle package existed.

Author: I have thought of this, and think I suggested it in the past. I am on the fence about it though. First off, a bundle package would not address the fact that bioconductor packages would need to be updated as a group. It would not help with package creation, PR review, or updates. In fact, it would add one more level as new and updated packages would need to be added to the bundle. All of the bioconductor packages would need to be added with version specs to avoid the possibility of some packages picking up a newer version of a dependency if an older bioconductor bundle is installed. The package file would be quite large and ever growing. Finally, I am not sure that people really want to install all of the spack bioconductor packages, although that may be viewed as reasonable if the bundle package existed.

Another key difference is that, while previous versions of packages are
available, they are not available from a site that can be programmatically set,
thus a ``list_url`` attribute can not be used. However, each package is also
available in a git repository, with branches corresponding to each Bioconductor
release. Thus, it is always possible to retrieve the version of any package
corresponding to a Bioconductor release simply by fetching the branch that
corresponds to the Bioconductor release of the package repository. For this
reason, spack Bioconductor R packages use the git repository, with the commit
of the respective branch used in the ``version()`` attribute of the package.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
cran and bioc attributes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Much like the ``pypi`` attribute for python packages, due to the fact that R

> packages are obtained from specific repositories, it is possible to setup shortcut

Reviewer: ```suggestion
packages are obtained from specific repositories, it is possible to set up shortcut
```

attributes that can be used to set ``homepage``, ``url``, ``list_url``, and
``git``. For example, the following ``cran`` attribute:

.. code-block:: python

>    cran = 'caret/caret_6.0-86.tar.gz'

Reviewer: The reason that the `pypi` attribute has this structure is because:

1. The package name may not always match the tarball name (e.g. `Foo_Bar/foo-bar-1.2.3.tar.gz`)
2. The package may not always use tar (e.g. `foo-bar/foo-bar-1.2.3.zip`)

Is this also the case for CRAN? If not, perhaps we could make this simpler and users would only need to set `cran = 'caret'`.

Author: I could be missing something but I think the form with the tarfile is needed for setting the `url` attribute. The `bioc` attribute only needs to set the `git` attribute so it uses the simpler form.

Reviewer: Yes, but if a tarball is always available, you could simply set `cran = 'caret'` and set the url to a fake version like `{cran}_1.2.3.tar.gz`.

Author: There are some differences in the way r- packages specify versions though. Some variants:
```
{cran}_1.2.3
{cran}_1.2-3
{cran}_1-2
{cran}_1.2
{cran}_1.2.3-1
{cran}_1.02
{cran}_1.2.3.4
{cran}_1.2-3.4
{cran}_1.2.3.4.5
```
There are also some that use date format versions. That does not seem like it could be faked.

Reviewer: But that part doesn't matter, as long as Spack detects the version in the URL and replaces it.

Author: Okay; I underestimated Spack's power in version processing then. It looks like all of the CRAN packages are `tar.gz` files so I will push out a change later today.

Thanks for pointing that out.

Reviewer: Just need to update this line of the docs now.

Author: Sorry, I missed that. Should the url example be left as-is or changed to reflect the stand-in version?
```
.. code-block:: python

   cran = 'caret'

is equivalent to:

.. code-block:: python

   homepage = 'https://cloud.r-project.org/package=caret'
   url      = 'https://cloud.r-project.org/src/contrib/caret_6.0-86.tar.gz'
   list_url = 'https://cloud.r-project.org/src/contrib/Archive/caret'
```

Author: I think it makes sense to leave it as-is. That makes it consistent with the format that is presented with `spack info`.
